---
layout: post
title: Sustainable Planning Seminar - Blog 12
tags:
- class
- sustainability
- reading
- blog
---

In this series of blog posts I will discuss some of the assigned readings
for the [Sustainable Planning Seminar](https://courses.illinois.edu/schedule/2021/spring/LA/446)
(Urban Planning/Geography/Landscape Architecture 446) at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC).

This week's readings were:
1. _A Sand County Almanac_ by Aldo Leopold (Read: Part 2: The Quality of Landscape)
2. "Green Cities, Growing Cities, Just Cities?" by Scott Campbell


### Thoughts

Campbell's article introduces and discusses the important tension among
three main goals: economic development, social justice, and environmental
conservation. At the center of the triangle formed by these points is "sustainability"
(which, I'm keen to call an "unstable equilibrium").
Throughout this course (LA 446 -- UIUC) we investigated each of these facets either
independently or in its relationship to one of the others. Rarely do we consider all
three simultaneously, something that Campbell does well. I particularly liked the
author's critique of looking to the past, from our pre-industrial and indigenous
ancestors, for guidance on future sustainability. Modern society will never be
forced into sustainable practices because the feedback mechanisms are too distant
or too diffuse. Thus, seeking to return to the holism of our indigenous past is
impractical. The author also criticizes the optimism of technological salvation.

Aldo Leopold's essays in _A Sand County Almanac_ read like descriptive
diary entries. The author delves into the _personality_ of a landscape and
its inhabitants. In the first part, for example, Leopold describes the awakening
of a Wisconsin marsh after a long night. In another section, he describes what
he sees while on a bus ride through Illinois. This section was especially relevant
because, having lived in Illinois my whole life, have considerable experience driving
up and down its long interstates. I tried mapping my experiences onto the ones
described in _Sand County_ and realized that I am only obtusely aware of the countryside
and have no imagination about what Illinois looked like before it was 76 percent
cropland. On a recent drive from Chicago, I stopped at a rest area and noticed
a sign that read:
>"The rest area is built on this rich prairie soil which allowed
a vast grassland to develop and occupy the area in pre-settlement times. A portion
of grassland was created on the grounds along the back border of the property."

I'm embarrassed to say now that I didn't take a look.
