---
layout: post
title: Sustainable Planning Seminar - Blog 5
tags:
- class
- sustainability
- reading
- blog
---

In this series of blog posts I will discuss some of the assigned readings
for the [Sustainable Planning Seminar](https://courses.illinois.edu/schedule/2021/spring/LA/446)
(Urban Planning/Geography/Landscape Architecture 446) at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC).

The readings for this week were selected sections (chapters 1, 2, 9) from the book
_The Geography of Nowhere_ by James Howard Kunstler, as well as his TED Talk
from 2007.

## Geography of Nowhere
---
### _Scary Places_

Kunstler describes his journey through the various built environments by tracing
his early childhood on Long Island through his years spent in Manhattan, and
finally ending in a college town. He contrasts his experiences as a teenager
in a city with those of his peers from "suburbia," whom the author thinks live
rather boring lives.
> Teen life was reduced to waiting for that transforming moment of becoming a
licensed driver.

With this one sentence, Kunstler explains the core of the problem. Suburban
"places" where so many people now live are 1) not walkable, thus offering
very little in the way of activities and productive preoccupations for youth,
2) unattractive, and poorly designed, such that young people cannot wait for
the chance to finally leave these places. Through this chapter, Kunstler
establishes his purpose for writing, which is to give readers a "vocabulary" and
history to understand how and why the natural and built worlds have been perverted
by unrestrained growth in America.

---
### _American Space_

This chapter begins the historical account of city design in the early days of
American colonies. The Puritans attempted to control the development of colonial
settlements but, invariably, these places progressed haphazardly. Later, the
author writes
> American land law was predicated on the paramount principle that land was first
and foremost a commodity for capital gain.

The notion of stewardship, that "we who are alive now are responsible for taking
proper care of the landscape so that further generations can dwell in it in
safety and happiness," was abandoned in favor of profits.

I found the author's choice to skip a discussion about the cultures that existed
before the "New World" was "discovered" by Europeans rather troubling. Especially
since this book was motivated by the authors frustration and disgust with the
destruction of "place." Native American cultures had a deep and profound connection
to the land they lived on -- "stewardship" was their way of life. This level
of connection to the living land has never been replicated by any Western society
(Cajete, 2000).

---
### _A Place Called Home_ and _How Bad Architecture Wrecked Cities_

In the chapter titled _A Place Called Home_ and Kunstler's TED talk about
the damage caused by bad architecture, Kunstler laments the awful progression of
the built world. He argues that true places called "home" no longer exist in a
meaningful way and that places no longer have value. It is my impression that
Kunstler equates American Individualism with the destruction of Nature, with
which I would not disagree.

---
### Thoughts

It seems to me that the foundational cause of all of our societal problems can
be traced back to a combination of capitalism and religion. Capitalism, is at
fault because it assumes that all values can be wrapped neatly in the form of
a dollar or capital. This clearly fails because it doesn't capture the long term
impacts of our choices. For example, the potential loss of productive capacity
from American farms due to climate change is not implicitly captured by the
dollar. This economic system emphasizes immediate rewards over long term sustainability.
Religion, particularly religions following the Judeo-Christian tradition, is at
fault because it has been used as an excuse for American exceptionalism. This
allegation I charged against religion is not at all nuanced, neither is my
implication of capitalism. Yet, whether the discussion is about energy, resource
management, damage from climate change, and even the design of the built
environment, it all leads to an apparent abdication of duty by the individual to
the collective.

---

#### Reference

Cajete, Gregory, and Bear L. Little. Native Science: Natural Laws of Interdependence., 2000. Print.
